CLM5-DART Tutorial (#330)
NCAR/DART: models/clm/tutorial/README.rst

focuses on only supporting official released versions of CLM.  This documentation
and scripting was tested using the CESM tag ``release-cesm2.2.0`` following
the download instructions `here <https://github.com/ESCOMP/CESM>`__.

Although the DART code may work with more recent versions of CESM (CLM) we recommend
checking out ``release-cesm2.2.0``.

  ::

    git clone https://github.com/escomp/cesm.git cesm_dart
    cd cesm_dart
    git checkout release-cesm2.2.0
    ./manage_externals/checkout_external

Adding CLM5 SourceMods
----------------------

Some minor modifications have to be made to the CLM5 source code in order
to be run with DART. Most importantly, these include skipping several
balance checks in CLM5 for the time step immediately after the assimilation
update step.  These sourcecode modifications are brought in 
through the SourceMod mechanism in CLM where modifications overwrite
the template sourcecode during the compilation step. The SourceMods
are located as tar files `here. <http://www.image.ucar.edu/pub/DART/CESM>`__
For this tutorial use the most recent tar file ``DART_SourceMods_cesm2_2_0_2021_07_02.tar``
and untar it on your local machine.  

::
 

>   tar -xvf DART_SourceMods_cesm2_2_0_2021_07_02.tar

Reviewer: I'd add some instructions on how to download the data directly to the machine. For instance:
`wget https://www.image.ucar.edu/pub/DART/CESM/DART_SourceMods_cesm2_2_0_2021_07_02.tar` 

This avoids the need to download (perhaps to a different machine) then copying the file to the right place.

For more information on the 
SourceMods see the main :doc:`CLM-DART documentation. <../readme>`

Step 2: Download DART
--------------------- 

The tutorial material is available within the most recent release of the
DART repository on the `main branch <https://github.com/NCAR/DART>`__.

::
 
  cd /glade/work/$USER/
  git clone https://github.com/NCAR/DART.git
  cd DART

Step 3: Navigating DART Scripts
-------------------------------

Below is a table of the key CLM5-DART setup scripts that include the 
settings required to perform an  assimilation run. All scripts are 
located at path ``DART/models/clm/shell_scripts/cesm2_2/`` with the 
exception of ``input.nml`` which is located at ``DART/models/clm/work/``.

You will be asked to locate, edit, and execute these scripts during the tutorial

> and are they are critical to customizing the assimilation run.  Given their importance, we

Reviewer: `and are they are` > `and they are`

> and are they are critical to customizing the assimilation run.  Given their importance, we

Reviewer: `and are they are` > `and they are`

introduce them right away.

For additional description of the CLM5-DART scripts and concepts please

> visit the main :doc:`CLM-DART documentation <../readme>`

Reviewer: So, all links that start with `:doc` do not take you anywhere. This is done in purpose. Right?

Author: Some of the :doc: links needed fixing from the when the PR was first issued, but my commits since the original PR should have fixed this.    I think all the links, including the :doc: links which give a relative path should be working now.   The current github compiled version seems to work OK for this particular link:   https://dart-documentation--330.org.readthedocs.build/en/330/models/clm/tutorial/README.html

> visit the main :doc:`CLM-DART documentation <../readme>`

Reviewer: So, all links that start with `:doc` do not take you anywhere. This is done in purpose. Right?

|                         | DART executables to relay the CLM files (restart, history)   |
|                         | to DART and executes the ``filter`` step to update the CLM   |
|                         | state variable. These updated files are then reinserted      |
|                         | into the restart file for the next CLM forecast step.        |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| input.nml               | Contains DART specific namelist settings such as             |
|                         | DA type, inflation, localization, outlier threshold etc.     |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Step 4: Compiling DART
----------------------

Similar to CLM, it is necessary to compile the DART code before an assimilation
can be performed.  The DART code includes a variety of build template scripts that provide
the appropriate compiler and library settings depending upon your system environment.
This is an example of how to set up the system environment for Cheyenne:

::

> 

Reviewer: I think this is a good place to talk about modules. For instance, I had openmpi loaded. I compiled everything successfully but the run failed because `mpiexec_mpt` was expected instead of `mpirun`

> 

Reviewer: I think this is a good place to talk about modules. For instance, I had openmpi loaded. I compiled everything successfully but the run failed because `mpiexec_mpt` was expected instead of `mpirun`

+--------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------+
| ``BIOMASS``              | ``QTY_LEAF_CARBON``         | ``leafc``       |                   
|                          | ``QTY_LIVE_STEM_CARBON``    | ``livestemc``   |
|                          | ``QTY_DEAD_STEM_CARBON``    | ``deadstemc``   |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------+

.. Note::

  For this tutorial example most of the **observation types** rely on a single **quantity**
  (and CLM variable) to calculate the expected observation.  For these the CLM
  variable is spatially interpolated to best match the location of the observation.
  The ``BIOMASS`` observation type is the exception in which 3 **quantities** are required
  to calculate the expected observation.  In that case the sum of the CLM
  variables of leaf, live stem and structural (dead) carbon represents the biomass observation. 
 

Second, the DART state space also defines which portion of the CLM model state is updated by DART. 
In DA terminology, limiting the influence of the observations to a subset of the CLM model

> state is know as 'localization' which is discussed more fully in Step 9.

Reviewer: `know as` > `known as`

> state is know as 'localization' which is discussed more fully in Step 9.

Reviewer: `know as` > `known as`

 endif

Modify the ``SourceModDir`` to match the directory that you set
in Step 1:

::

 setenv use_SourceMods TRUE
 setenv SourceModDir   <your SourceMods directory>

Confirm the following variables are set to match your personal
environment, especially ``cesmroot``, ``caseroot``, ``cime_output_root``,
``dartroot`` and ``project``. 

::

 setenv cesmdata         /glade/p/cesmdata/cseg/inputdata
 setenv cesmroot         /glade/work/${USER}/CESM/${cesmtag}
 setenv caseroot         /glade/work/${USER}/cases/${cesmtag}/${CASE}
 setenv cime_output_root /glade/scratch/${USER}/${cesmtag}/${CASE}
 setenv rundir           ${cime_output_root}/run
 setenv exeroot          ${cime_output_root}/bld
 setenv archdir          ${cime_output_root}/archive
 ..
 ..
 setenv dartroot         /glade/work/${USER}/git/DART_public
 setenv baseobsdir       /glade/p/cisl/dares/Observations/land
 ..
 ..
 setenv project      <insert project number>
 setenv machine      cheyenne

Step 12: Execute the Assimilation Run
-------------------------------------

Set up the assimilation case by executing ``CLM5_setup_assimilation``

::

 cd DART/models/clm/shell_scripts/cesm2_2/

>  ./CLM5_setup_assimilation

Reviewer: - It would be good to mention how long the script is expected to take before completion (e.g., 5-10 mins). 
- Can we submit this script as a PBS job instead of just running it on the login node?  
- Sampling error correction is not used. Maybe we should not copy the SEC netcdf file to the run dir.

>  ./CLM5_setup_assimilation

Reviewer: - It would be good to mention how long the script is expected to take before completion (e.g., 5-10 mins). 
- Can we submit this script as a PBS job instead of just running it on the login node?

 below.**  

After the case is created, by default, it is set up as a 'free' or 'open-loop'
run.  This means if the case is submitted as is, it will perform a normal CLM 
simulation without using any DART assimilation.  In order to enable DART
do the following:

::

 cd <caseroot>
 ./CESM_DART_config

.. Caution::

 After the script is executed and DART is enabled 'Check the DART configuration:'
 will be displayed followed by suggested steps (1-5). As before these steps are good for
 general reference, however, **for the tutorial ignore these steps and continue to follow
 the instructions below.** 

Now that DART is enabled, confirm, and if necessary, modify the run-time
settings to perform daily assimilations for 5 total days. Use the
scripts ``xmlquery`` to view the current settings (e.g. ``./xmlquery STOP_OPTION``)
and ``xmlchange`` to change the current settings (e.g. ``./xmlchange STOP_OPTION=nhours``).
Make sure the run-time settings are as follows:

::
 
 DATA_ASSIMILATION_LND=TRUE
 DATA_ASSIMILATION_SCRIPT= ~/assimilate.csh
 STOP_OPTION=nhours
 STOP_N=24
 DATA_ASSIMILATION_CYCLES=5
 RESUBMIT=0
 CONTINUE_RUN=FALSE

> 

Reviewer: It would be easier for the user if we know where these options are. For instance, `env_run.xml`
I'm one of those users who like to view and explore the files in the case directory

> 

Reviewer: It would be easier for the user if we know where these options are. For instance, `env_run.xml`
I'm one of those users who like to view and explore the files in the case directory

|                             | job submission                                              |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``RESUBMIT``                | The number of times each job submission is repeated as      |
|                             | defined by ``STOP_OPTION``, ``STOP_N``, and                 |
|                             | ``DATA_ASSIMILATION_CYCLES``                                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``CONTINUE_RUN``            | If ``.FALSE.`` this is the startup of the assimilation run  |
|                             | beginning from the ``refcase``.  If ``.TRUE.`` this is a    |
|                             | continuation of a previous assimilation run.                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+ 

 
Before submission review your ``input.nml`` within your case folder to confirm
the settings reflect those from previous steps of the tutorial.  Next submit
the assimilation run:

::

 > cd <caseroot>
 > ./case.submit

> 

Reviewer: What if a run fails? Maybe it's good to talk about both CESM and DART staging scripts here.

> 

Reviewer: What if a run fails? Maybe it's good to talk about both CESM and DART staging scripts here.

Check the status of the job on Cheyenne using PBS commands to determine if job
is queued (Q), running (R) or completed.

> 

Reviewer: I'm at this stage at the moment. My filter is failing at the `fill_inflation_restart` step. I'm not sure if I did something wrong or we have to fix something. Here is the error: 
```  
fill_inflation_restart:  - Reading File : clm_restart.nc
  fill_inflation_restart:  - Reading File : clm_history.nc
 ERROR FROM:
  source : netcdf_utilities_mod.f90
  routine: read_variables: nf90_get_var
  message: TLAI: NetCDF: Start+count exceeds dimension bound
  message: ...
```

> 

Reviewer: I'm at this stage at the moment. My filter is failing at the `fill_inflation_restart` step. I'm not sure if I did something wrong or we have to fix something. Here is the error: 
```  
fill_inflation_restart:  - Reading File : clm_restart.nc
  fill_inflation_restart:  - Reading File : clm_history.nc
 ERROR FROM:
  source : netcdf_utilities_mod.f90
  routine: read_variables: nf90_get_var
  message: TLAI: NetCDF: Start+count exceeds dimension bound
  message: ...
```

Author: Thanks for working through this @mgharamti -- can you provide your ``input.nml`` file within your ``<caseroot>`` directory that led to the ``fill_inflation_restart`` error?

Reviewer: Brett, here is my case directory: `/glade/work/gharamti/cases/cesm_dart/clm5_dart_tut` The input.nml file should be in there.

Author: Looking at this now-- problem is definitely on my end.

Author: So that took longer to figure out than I expected -- sorry about that.  The problem is that the DART state is missing the clm variable for soil temperature ``TSOI``.   Adding this variable into the ``&model_nml`` should fix the problem, and should look like:

```
   clm_variables  = 'leafc',       'QTY_LEAF_CARBON',            '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'frac_sno',    'QTY_SNOWCOVER_FRAC',         '0.0', '1.', 'restart' , 'NO_COPY_BACK',
                    'SNOW_DEPTH',  'QTY_SNOW_THICKNESS',         '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'NO_COPY_BACK',
                    'H2OSOI_LIQ',  'QTY_SOIL_LIQUID_WATER',      '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'H2OSOI_ICE',  'QTY_SOIL_ICE',               '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'T_SOISNO',    'QTY_TEMPERATURE',            '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'livestemc',   'QTY_LIVE_STEM_CARBON',       '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'deadstemc',   'QTY_DEAD_STEM_CARBON',       '0.0', 'NA', 'restart' , 'UPDATE',
                    'TSOI',        'QTY_SOIL_TEMPERATURE',       'NA' , 'NA', 'history' , 'NO_COPY_BACK',
                    'TLAI',        'QTY_LEAF_AREA_INDEX',        '0.0', 'NA', 'vector'  , 'NO_COPY_BACK',
   /
```

This was my fault for not double-checking the run configuration before issuing the PR, sorry about that.  The error code for this was a bit misleading as well -- that is because not only is the clm variable ``TSOI`` used as a forward operator for the assimilation of soil temperature, but also ``TSOI`` is within the ``history`` file domain for clm.  The ``history`` file is a unique domain to DART.  Therefore the code was looking for the 3 domains including ``restart``, ``history`` and ``history_vector``, but the clm_variables list only specified 2 out of 3 of those domains, which triggered the error.  Should work now.    Will add a commit to permanently fix this.

Reviewer: @braczka Thanks for checking this. Here is what's happening now. `fill_inflation_restart` worked fine but `filter` failed with this error

``` 
Before preassim state space output TIME: 2022/03/08 16:47:02
 ERROR FROM:
  source : netcdf_utilities_mod.f90
  routine: write_variables:
  message: nf90_inq_varid "leafc": NetCDF: Variable not found
  message: ...
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
MPI_ABORT was invoked on rank 0 in communicator MPI COMMUNICATOR 3 DUP FROM 0
with errorcode 99.

NOTE: invoking MPI_ABORT causes Open MPI to kill all MPI processes.
You may or may not see output from other processes, depending on
exactly when Open MPI kills them.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
MPT ERROR: could not run executable.
	(HPE MPT 2.21  11/28/19 04:22:45)
Killed
```

The variable `leafc` seems to be present in my prior ensemble members `clm5_dart_tut.clm2_000?.r.2011-01-02-00000.nc`! I'm not sure what's triggering this. Here is my run directory if you'd like to have a look: `/glade/scratch/gharamti/cesm_dart/clm5_dart_tut/run`

Author: I compared both our tutorial cases on Cheyenne and they look identical in terms of the the setup scripts of ``CLM5_setup_assimilation``, ``DART_params.csh`` and ``input.nml``.    Not obvious what is going on so I diffused both of our ``da.log`` files:   ``/glade/scratch/bmraczka/cesm2.2.0/clm5_SWE0_tutorialfix/run/da.log.3199371.chadmin1.ib0.cheyenne.ucar.edu.220308-141434`` against ``/glade/scratch/gharamti/cesm_dart/clm5_dart_tut/run/da.log.3201989.chadmin1.ib0.cheyenne.ucar.edu.220308-164401``  and there seems to be an important difference in how the mpi process are allocated during ``filter``.  For example, I show below excerpted differences in our da.log files:

```
 --------------------------------------
 Starting ... at YYYY MM DD HH MM SS = 
                 2022  3  8 14 17 22
 Program Filter
 --------------------------------------
 
  set_nml_output Echo NML values to log file only
 PE 0: initialize_mpi_utilities:  Running with          360  MPI processes.
 PE 0: static_init_model  assimilation period is            2  days         3600
   seconds
```
compared to:

```
 --------------------------------------
 Starting ... at YYYY MM DD HH MM SS = 
                 2022  3  8 16 46 51
 Program Filter
 --------------------------------------
 
  set_nml_output Echo NML values to log file only
 PE 0: initialize_mpi_utilities:  Running with            1  MPI processes.
 PE 0: static_init_model  assimilation period is            2  days         3600  seconds
```

Also my da.log provides the following chunk of lines, where yours does not:

```
 PE 0: assim_tools_init: Replicating a copy of the ensemble mean on every task
 PE 0: assim_tools_init: ... uses more memory per task but may run faster if doi
 ng vertical
 PE 0: assim_tools_init: ... coordinate conversion; controlled by namelist item 
 "distribute_mean"
 PE 0: assim_tools_init: Not doing vertical localization, no vertical coordinate
  conversion required
```

 Finally yours gives an mpt error during ``filter`` prior to the ``leafc`` error:
```
 PE 0: create_and_open_state_output  Creating output file preassim_member_0001_d01.nc
MPT: Launch error on r14i1n12.ib0.cheyenne.ucar.edu
```

Not sure what accounts for these differences, it looks like our run log files submit the jobs identically:
```
run command is mpiexec_mpt -p "%g:"  -np 360  omplace -tm open64  /glade/scratch/bmraczka/cesm2.2.0/clm5_SWE0_tutorialfix/bld/cesm.exe   >> cesm.log.$LID 2>&1
   Running /glade/work/bmraczka/cases/cesm2.2.0/clm5_SWE0_tutorialfix/assimilate.csh

```

I don't set up my DART environment in any particular way.  The modules loaded on Cheyenne are:

```
Currently Loaded Modules:
  1) ncarenv/1.3   2) intel/19.0.5   3) ncarcompilers/0.5.0   4) mpt/2.22   5) netcdf/4.7.4   6) ncl/6.6.2   7) nco/4.9.5   8) diffuse/0.4.8
```

  I will continue to look at this..... maybe @hkershaw-brown can take a look too?

Reviewer 2: For leafc not being found: Brett's log file shows the preassim files being created. 

Moha's log does not, so is Moha's case trying to write to an existing file that does not have leafc? Maybe a file from a previous run?

For the extra log message "Replicating a copy", Brett is getting that because he is running on 360 processes and Moha is running on 1. For 1 process there is no need to warn about distributing the state across processes. So the extra log message is expected - but the running on 1 process means something is not quite right. 

I think Moha has a funky mix of openmpi and mpt in his environment.  The error message at the end of Moha's log file is 

```diff
MPI_ABORT was invoked on rank 0 in communicator MPI COMMUNICATOR 3 DUP FROM 0
with errorcode 99.

NOTE: invoking MPI_ABORT causes Open MPI to kill all MPI processes.
You may or may not see output from other processes, depending on
-exactly when Open MPI kills them.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
-MPT ERROR: could not run executable.
	(HPE MPT 2.21  11/28/19 04:22:45)
Killed
```

I think this is weird.  I would have a look at the mpi first, then the netcdf problem. 
For example,  if you have 360 serial versions of filter trying to write to the same netcdf file at the same time might cause unexpected errors. I'm not saying this is the cause of the netcdf problem here, but you can get funky effects e.g.
https://github.com/NCAR/DART/issues/308

Brett, I'll give running the tutorial a go with the default modules. Maybe worth Moha doing a `module purge`, `module load blah blah blah` before running the tutorial. I think the CESM case is set up to use MPT (correct me if I wrong).

Author: Thanks Helen -- will be helpful to see what you get when you run the tutorial.  The only significant difference that Moha and I could identify between our modules was I had `intel/19.0.5 ` loaded whereas Moha had `intel/19.1.1`.   Doesn't seem the likely difference.   Also our CESM and DART versions were identical......

Reviewer 2: Ran the tutorial, runs the 5 assimilation cycles to completion.  Runs filter with 360 processes
/glade/scratch/hkershaw/cesm_dart/clm5_f09_assim_e5/run/

Reviewer: I removed my cesm_dart directory and recompiled both dart and the model. The experiment completed the 5 cycles successfully. Here is my run: `/glade/work/gharamti/cases/cesm_dart/clm5_dart_tut` 
I think when I switched from `openmpi` to `mpt` I only re-complied one executable (cannot recall whether it was DART or CESM). So, it's good now. 
Now, I want to re-iterate my previous my comment. I think it's important to discuss the modules before asking the users to compile. I usually use `openmpi` (for my other application). I went through the tutorial without even realizing the need for `mpt`. I got an error during the run and then I made a swap in the modules. This needs to be clarified in STEP 1 or 2.

Reviewer: @hkershaw-brown thanks for your insights again!

Author: Thanks @hkershaw-brown and very much appreciate the feedback @mgharamti.   Will make a point to document/discuss the module environment before the user compiles.

+===========================+=============================================================+
| refcase                   | The reference casename from the spinup ensemble that serves |
|                           | as the starting conditions for the assimilation.            |
+---------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| refyear, refmon, refday   | The year, month, day and time of day of the reference case  |
| reftod                    | that the assimilation will start from.                      |
+---------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| stagedir                  | The directory location of the reference case files.         |
+---------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

Step 7: Setting up the observations to be assimilated 
-----------------------------------------------------

In 'Step 4: Compiling DART' we have already completed an important
step by executing ``preprocess`` which generates source code 
(``obs_def_mod.f90``, ``obs_kind_mod.f90``) that supports the assimilation of observations

> used for this tutorial.  In this step, we link the observations to the DART
> code so they can be read during the assimilation. The observations are read into the
> assimilation through an observation sequence file whose format is described 

Reviewer 2: If you can, avoid the work link here.  Link is to something external (e.g. linking to the netcdf library) whereas the obs_def_mod.f90 and obs_kind_mod.f90 are compiled into DART.  I think you want people to get the takaway that if they rerun preprocess they have to _recompile_ filter. 

```suggestion
used for this tutorial.  In this step, we compile these observation definitions in to the DART
executables. The observations are read into the
assimilation through an observation sequence file whose format is described 
```

> `here <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/guide/detailed-structure-obs-seq.html>`__.

Reviewer 2: relative vs. hardcoded to latest version.
```suggestion
:doc:`here <../../guide/detailed-structure-obs-seq>`
```

|                                | standard deviation files:``input_priorinf_mean.nc``           |
|                                | ``input_priorinf_sd.nc`` for the first time-step only.        |
+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``prior_inf_mean``             | Initial value of prior inflation mean when                    |
|                                | ``write_prior_inf = .TRUE.``                                  |
+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``prior_inf_sd``               | Initial value of prior inflation standard deviation when      |
|                                | ``write_prior_inf = .TRUE.``                                  |
+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+               

Step 11: Complete the Assimilation Setup
---------------------------------------- 

A few setup steps remain before the assimilation case can be executed.  First, the complete
list of DART executables must be generated.  At this point you should have already customized

> your ``mkmf_template`` and tested your local build environment in Step 4.  In this step,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
your ``mkmf.template`` and tested your local build environment in Step 4.  In this step,
```

   setenv CASE clm5_f09_pmo_SIF
 else
   setenv CASE <your tutorial case name>
 endif

Modify the ``SourceModDir`` to match the directory that you set
in Step 1:

::

 setenv use_SourceMods TRUE
 setenv SourceModDir   <your SourceMods directory>

Confirm the following variables are set to match your personal
environment, especially ``cesmroot``, ``caseroot``, ``cime_output_root``,
``dartroot`` and ``project``. 

::

 setenv cesmdata         /glade/p/cesmdata/cseg/inputdata
 setenv cesmroot         /glade/work/${USER}/CESM/${cesmtag}
 setenv caseroot         /glade/work/${USER}/cases/${cesmtag}/${CASE}
 setenv cime_output_root /glade/scratch/${USER}/${cesmtag}/${CASE}
 setenv rundir           ${cime_output_root}/run
 setenv exeroot          ${cime_output_root}/bld
 setenv archdir          ${cime_output_root}/archive
 ..
 ..
 setenv dartroot         /glade/work/${USER}/git/DART_public
 setenv baseobsdir       /glade/p/cisl/dares/Observations/land
 ..
 ..
 setenv project      <insert project number>
 setenv machine      cheyenne

Step 12: Execute the Assimilation Run
-------------------------------------

Set up the assimilation case by executing ``CLM5_setup_assimilation``

::

>  > cd <dartroot>/models/clm/shell_scripts/cesm2_2/
>  > ./CLM5_setup_assimilation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 cd DART/models/clm/shell_scripts/cesm2_2/
 ./CLM5_setup_assimilation
```

.. Caution::

 Once the setup is complete the script will output steps
 (1-8) displaying 'Check the case'. These steps are good for general reference,
 however, **for the tutorial ignore these steps and continue to follow the instructions
 below.**  

After the case is created, by default, it is set up as a 'free' or 'open-loop'
run.  This means if the case is submitted as is, it will perform a normal CLM 
simulation without using any DART assimilation.  In order to enable DART
do the following:

::

>  > cd <caseroot>
>  > ./CESM_DART_config

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 cd <caseroot>
 ./CESM_DART_config
```

|                             | job submission                                              |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``RESUBMIT``                | The number of times each job submission is repeated as      |
|                             | defined by ``STOP_OPTION``, ``STOP_N``, and                 |
|                             | ``DATA_ASSIMILATION_CYCLES``                                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``CONTINUE_RUN``            | If ``.FALSE.`` this is the startup of the assimilation run  |
|                             | beginning from the ``refcase``.  If ``.TRUE.`` this is a    |
|                             | continuation of a previous assimilation run.                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+ 

 
Before submission review your ``input.nml`` within your case folder to confirm
the settings reflect those from previous steps of the tutorial.  Next submit
the assimilation run:

::

 > cd <caseroot directory>

>  > ./case.submit

Reviewer 2: Is <caseroot directory> different to <caseroot> ?

Author: No -- I made this change.

Check the status of the job on Cheyenne using PBS commands to determine if job
is queued (Q), running (R) or completed.

::

>  > qstat -u <your username>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 qstat -u <your username>
```

Step 13: Diagnose the Assimilation Run
--------------------------------------

Once the job has completed it is important to confirm it ran as expected
without any errors.  To confirm this view the ``CaseStatus`` files:

::

>  > cd <caseroot>
>  > cat CaseRoot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 cd <caseroot>
 cat CaseRoot
```

it ran with good performance. A simple, first check after any assimilation is to 
make sure:

1) Observations have been  accepted
2) The CLM posterior member values are updated from their prior values

A quick way to confirm observation acceptance and the posteriors have been updated
is through the ``obs_seq.final`` file located in your case run folder. Below we provide
an example of a successful update (``clm_obs_seq.2011-01-02-00000.final``)  which is
derived from the same leaf area observation in ``obs_seq.2011-01-02-00000`` as described
in Step 7.  

::

 OBS            3
   6.00864688253571
   5.44649167346675
   5.45489142211957
   5.45808308572015
   3.479253215076174E-002
   3.469211455745640E-002
   5.41512442472872
   5.41843086313655
   5.44649167346675
   5.44970758027390
   5.50877061923831
   5.51180677764943
   5.46367193547511
   5.46683825691274
   5.44039845768897
   5.44363195062815
   0.000000000000000E+000
   0.000000000000000E+000
           2           4          -1
 obdef
 loc3d
     5.235987755982989         0.000000000000000        -888888.0000000000     -2
 kind
          23
     0     149750
  0.200000000000000

> ::

Reviewer 2: I think this would benefit from a note that the snipped below is explaining what all the entries are in obs_seq.final

Author: Completed.

   <observation sequence number>
   <observation value>
   <true observation value>
   <prior ensemble mean>
   <posterior ensemble mean>
   <prior ensemble spread>
   <posterior ensemble spread>
   <prior member 1>
   <posterior member 1>
   <prior member 2>
   <posterior member 2>
   <prior member 3>
   <posterior member 3>
   <prior member 4>
   <posterior member 4>
   <prior member 5>
   <posterior member 5>
   <data product QC>
   <DART quality control>
 
 obdef
 loc3d
     <longitude>    <latitude>   <vertical level>   <vertical code>
 kind
    <observation quantity number>
    <seconds>     <days>
    <observation error variance>

In the example above, the observation has been **accepted**
denoted by a ``DART quality control value = 0``. If the 
``DART quality control value =7`` this indicates the observation has
fallen outside the ``outlier_threshold`` value and is rejected. 
For more details on the DART quality control variables read the  

> `documentation. <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/assimilation_code/modules/assimilation/quality_control_mod.html>`__

Reviewer 2: relative link
```suggestion
:doc:`documentation. <../../assimilation_code/modules/assimilation/quality_control_mod
```

First, in your own tutorial assimilation confirm that this observation
(and other observations) was accepted.

Second, confirm that the ``posterior member`` values have been updated
from their respective ``prior member`` values.  In general the
``posterior member`` and ``posterior ensemble mean`` values should become
closer to the `observation value` as compared to the prior values.

::

>  > cd <caseroot>
>  > vi clm_obs_seq.2011-01-02-00000.final

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  cd <caseroot>
  less clm_obs_seq.2011-01-02-00000.final
```

You could suggest less (or cat if there are not many observations) here since this is just viewing the output.

This tutorial has been purposely designed such that all observations
are accepted and the posteriors have been updated.  In research applications,
however, the vast majority of observations may be rejected if there is
large systemic biases between the model ensemble and the observations.
In that case, it may take many assimilation time steps before the inflation
creates a sufficient enough ensemble spread such that the observation falls
within the outlier threshold and is accepted.  In other cases, 
an observation may be accepted, but the posterior update is negligible. 
If you experience these issues, a helpful troubleshooting guide is 

> located `here. <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/guide/dart-quality-control.html>`__   

Reviewer 2: relative link
```suggestion
located :doc:`here. <../../guide/quality_control_mod`

```

Matlab Diagnostics
------------------

Once you have confirmed that the assimilation has been completed
reasonably well as outlined by the steps above, the DART package includes
a wide variety of Matlab diagnostic scripts that provide a more formal evaluation
of assimilation performance.  These diagnostics can provide clues
to further maximize performance through adjustments of the DART settings 
(localization, inflation, etc.). The full suite of diagnostic scripts can be found
at this path in your DART installation (``<dartroot>/diagnostics/matlab``) with supporting 
documentation found `here. <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/guide/matlab-observation-space.html>`__

.. Note::
   
 Additional scripts that are designed for CLM output visualization

>  can be found here (``<dartroot>/models/clm/matlab``).  The ``clm_get_var.m`` and ``clm_plot_var.m``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 can be found here (``DART/models/clm/matlab``).  The ``clm_get_var.m`` and ``clm_plot_var.m``
```

 scripts are designed to re-constitute a vector-based file (e.g. restart.nc) into 
 gridded averages to allow viewing of spatial maps.  These scripts are helpful to
 view the model update by DART (innovations). An example of how to implement these

>  scripts can be found here (``<dartroot>/models/clm/matlab/README.txt``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 scripts can be found here (``DART/models/clm/matlab/README.txt``).
```

          
Here we provide instructions to execute two highly recommended matlab scripts.
First, the ``plot_rmse_xxx_evolution.m`` script provides a time series of 
assimilation statistics of 1) observation acceptance, 2) RMSE between
the observations and the expected observation (derived from the CLM state),
and 3) a third statistic of your choosing (we recommended 'total spread').

The observation acceptance statistic compares the number of observations assimilated
versus the number of observations available for your domain.  In general, it
is desirable to assimilate the majority of observations that are available.
The RMSE statistic quantifies the mismatch between the observations and the
CLM state.  A successful assimilation reduces the RMSE, thus reducing the mismatch
between the observations and the CLM state. Finally the total spread provides
contributions from the ensemble spread and observation error variance. This value
should be comparable to the RMSE.

To execute ``plot_rmse_xxx_evolution.m`` do the following:

::
 

>  > cd <dartroot>/models/clm/work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 cd DART/models/clm/work
```

Confirm the DART executables used for the matlab diagnostics exist.
These should have been compiled during Step 11 of this tutorial.
The important DART executables for the diagnostics are
``obs_diag`` and ``obs_seq_to_netcdf``.  If they do not exist,
perform the ``./quickbuild.csh -mpi`` command to create them.

Next generate a text file that includes all the ``obs_seq*.final``
files from the tutorial simulation

::
 

>  > ls <rundir>/*final > obs_seq_files_tutorial.txt 

Reviewer 2: rundir here is a ways away from where it was defined.  It might be worth a reminder of where rundir is. 

```
setenv rundir           ${cime_output_root}/run
```

```suggestion
 ls <rundir>/*final > obs_seq_files_tutorial.txt 
```

Next edit the ``&obs_diag_nml`` namelist within the ``input.nml``.
to assign the `obs_seqence_list` 
to the text file containing the names of the ``obs_seq*.final``
files associated with the tutorial.  Next, specify how the
observations are displayed by defining the ``bin`` settings, which
for this tutorial are set such that every day of observations
are displayed individually. Because the tutorial is a global run
we define the ``lonlim`` and ``latlim`` setting to include the
entire globe.  For more information about the  ``obs_diag`` namelist

> settings go `here.  <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/assimilation_code/programs/obs_diag/threed_sphere/obs_diag.html>`__  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
settings go :doc:`here.  <../../assimilation_code/programs/obs_diag/threed_sphere/obs_diag.html>`
```

::

 &obs_diag_nml
   obs_sequence_name = ''
   obs_sequence_list = 'obs_seq_files_tutorial.txt'
   first_bin_center =  2011, 1,  1, 0, 0, 0
   last_bin_center  =  2011, 1,  5, 0, 0, 0
   bin_separation   =     0, 0,  1, 0, 0, 0
   bin_width        =     0, 0,  1, 0, 0, 0
   time_to_skip     =     0, 0,  0, 0, 0, 0
   max_num_bins     = 1000
   trusted_obs      = 'null'
   Nregions   = 1
   lonlim1    =     0.0,     
   lonlim2    =   360.0,   
   latlim1    =   -90.0,     
   latlim2    =    90.0,   
   reg_names  = 'Globe', 
   hlevel_edges =  0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 10.0, 40.0
   print_mismatched_locs = .false.
   create_rank_histogram = .true.
   outliers_in_histogram = .true.
   use_zero_error_obs    = .false.
   verbose               = .true.
   /

Next convert the information in the ``obs_seq*.final`` files into
a netcdf format (``obs_diag_output.nc``) by executing the 
``obs_diag`` executable.

::
 
 >  ./obs_diag

Next, use Matlab to create the ``plot_rmse_xxx_evolution.m`` figures.
Note that this function automatically plots the RMSE, where the ``copy``
and the ``obsname`` variable are customizable.

::

>  > cd <dartroot>/diagnostics/matlab
>  > module load matlab
>  >> matlab -nodesktop

Reviewer 2: Your double prompt starts a line too early

```suggestion
 cd DART/diagnostics/matlab
 module load matlab
 matlab -nodesktop
```

 >> fname   = '<dartroot>/models/clm/work/obs_diag_output.nc';
 >> copy    = 'totalspread';
 >> obsname = 'MODIS_LEAF_AREA_INDEX';
 >> plotdat = plot_rmse_xxx_evolution(fname, copy, 'obsname', obsname);

Second, the ``link_obs.m`` provides several features, including a spatial
map of the observation locations with color coded DART QC values.  This allows
the user to identify observation acceptance as a function of sub-regions.

Next edit both the ``&obs_seq_to_netcdf_nml`` and ``&schedule_nml`` namelist sections
within ``input.nml``.

> For this tutorial we plot a list of  ``obs_seq<>.final`` files as shown below,

Reviewer 2: what is the `<>` for in file name?

Author: Switched to * notation which I used prior to this line for consistency.

which includes the global domain.  We include all observations within a single
``bin``.  For more information about these settings go 

> `here. <https://docs.dart.ucar.edu/en/latest/assimilation_code/programs/obs_seq_to_netcdf/obs_seq_to_netcdf.html>`__ 

Reviewer 2: relative link
```suggestion
`here. <../../assimilation_code/programs/obs_seq_to_netcdf/obs_seq_to_netcdf>` 
```

::

 &obs_seq_to_netcdf_nml
   obs_sequence_name = ''
   obs_sequence_list = 'obs_seq_files_tutorial.txt'
   append_to_netcdf  = .false.
   lonlim1    =    0.0
   lonlim2    =  360.0
   latlim1    =  -90.0
   latlim2    =   90.0
   verbose    = .false.
   /

 &schedule_nml
   calendar        = 'Gregorian'
   first_bin_start =  1601,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0
   first_bin_end   =  2999,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0
   last_bin_end    =  2999,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0
   bin_interval_days    = 1000000
   bin_interval_seconds = 0
   max_num_bins         = 1000
   print_table          = .true.
   /

Next execute the ``obs_seq_to_netcdf`` to convert the observation
information into a netcdf readable file (``obs_epoch_001.nc``) for 
``link_obs.m``

::

>  > ./obs_seq_to_netcdf

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ./obs_seq_to_netcdf
```

Next, use Matlab to create the ``link_obs.m`` figures.

::

>  > cd <dartroot>/diagnostics/matlab
>  > module load matlab
>  > matlab -nodesktop

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 cd DART/diagnostics/matlab
 module load matlab
 matlab -nodesktop
```

  use the following links to download these files directly:
                      
  1. `CAM6 Reanalysis Meteorology <https://rda.ucar.edu/datasets/ds345.0/>`__,
  Year 2011, ensemble members 1-5 only: ``f.e21.FHIST_BGC.f09_025.CAM6assim.011.cpl_000{1-5}.ha2x3h.2011.nc`` 
  
  2. `Reference Case and Observations <https://www.image.ucar.edu/pub/DART/CESM/clmdart_tutorial/>`__ 
   

Step 1: Download CLM5
---------------------

CLM is continually being updated by the model developer and user community
consisting of both NCAR and university scientists and researchers.
In contrast, DART is maintained by a relatively small group that supports
numerous earth system models (20+) including CLM. Therefore the DART team
focuses on only supporting official released versions of CLM.  This documentation
and scripting was tested using the CESM tag ``release-cesm2.2.0`` following
the download instructions `here <https://github.com/ESCOMP/CESM>`__.

Although the DART code may work with more recent versions of CESM (CLM) we recommend
checking out ``release-cesm2.2.0``.

  ::

    git clone https://github.com/escomp/cesm.git cesm_dart
    cd cesm_dart
    git checkout release-cesm2.2.0

>     ./manage_externals/checkout_external

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ./manage_externals/checkout_externals
```

|                             | ``DATA_ASSIMILATION_CYCLES``                                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``CONTINUE_RUN``            | If ``.FALSE.`` this is the startup of the assimilation run  |
|                             | beginning from the ``refcase``.  If ``.TRUE.`` this is a    |
|                             | continuation of a previous assimilation run.                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+ 

 
Before submission review your ``input.nml`` within your case folder to confirm
the settings reflect those from previous steps of the tutorial.  Next submit
the assimilation run:

::

 > cd <caseroot>
 > ./case.submit

Check the status of the job on Cheyenne using PBS commands to determine if job
is queued (Q), running (R) or completed.

::

 qstat -u <your username>

Step 13: Diagnose the Assimilation Run
--------------------------------------

Once the job has completed it is important to confirm it ran as expected
without any errors.  To confirm this view the ``CaseStatus`` files:

::

 cd <caseroot>

>  cat CaseRoot

Reviewer: Do you mean: `cat CaseStatus` ?

   <posterior member 2>
   <prior member 3>
   <posterior member 3>
   <prior member 4>
   <posterior member 4>
   <prior member 5>
   <posterior member 5>
   <data product QC>
   <DART quality control>
 
 obdef
 loc3d
     <longitude>    <latitude>   <vertical level>   <vertical code>
 kind
    <observation quantity number>
    <seconds>     <days>
    <observation error variance>

In the example above, the observation has been **accepted**
denoted by a ``DART quality control value = 0``. If the 
``DART quality control value =7`` this indicates the observation has
fallen outside the ``outlier_threshold`` value and is rejected. 
For more details on the DART quality control variables read the  
:doc:`documentation. <../../../assimilation_code/modules/assimilation/quality_control_mod>`

First, in your own tutorial assimilation confirm that this observation
(and other observations) was accepted.

Second, confirm that the ``posterior member`` values have been updated
from their respective ``prior member`` values.  In general the
``posterior member`` and ``posterior ensemble mean`` values should become
closer to the `observation value` as compared to the prior values.

::

>   cd <caseroot>

Reviewer: I think this should be the `rundir` instead of `caseroot`, right?

  less clm_obs_seq.2011-01-02-00000.final

This tutorial has been purposely designed such that all observations
are accepted and the posteriors have been updated.  In research applications,
however, the vast majority of observations may be rejected if there is
large systemic biases between the model ensemble and the observations.
In that case, it may take many assimilation time steps before the inflation
creates a sufficient enough ensemble spread such that the observation falls
within the outlier threshold and is accepted.  In other cases, 
an observation may be accepted, but the posterior update is negligible. 
If you experience these issues, a helpful troubleshooting guide is 
located :doc:`here. <../../../guide/dart-quality-control>`

> Matlab Diagnostics

Reviewer: @braczka, I think it would be useful to actually show a figure or 2 here. For instance, the result of `plot_rmse_xxx_evolution` and `link_obs.m` The user will them compare theirs to the ones in the tutorial.
